
# Week 1 (10/5): Introduction to spatial data science


## Lecture
###   Overview of the course
*   Welcome!
*   Expectations
*   Introductions
*   Who are you? Survey results...
*   Mid-term and final projects will be based on groups (pairings)
*   Where did ArcMap go?
*   Questions? Concerns?

###   What is Spatial Data Science?

First, a definition:

>Space and time matter not only for the obvious reason that everything happens somewhere and at some time, but because knowing where and when things happen is critical to understanding why and how they happened or will happen. Spatial data science is concerned with the representation, modeling, and simulation of spatial processes, as well as with the publication, retrieval, reuse, integration, and analysis of spatial data. It generalizes and unifies research from fields such as geographic information science, geoinformatics, geo/spatial statistics, remote sensing, and transportation studies, and fosters the application of methods developed in these fields to outside disciplines ranging from the social to the physical sciences. In doing so, research on spatial data science must address a variety of new challenges that relate to the diversity of the utilized data and the underlying conceptual models from various domains, the opportunistic reuse of existing data, the scalability of its methods, the support of users not familiar with the language and methods of traditional geographic information systems, the reproducibility of its results that are often generated by complex chains of methods, the uncertainty arising from the use of its methods and data, the visualization of complex spatiotemporal processes and data about them, and, finally, the data collection, analysis, and visualization playing out in near real-time. Spatial data science does not only utilize advanced techniques from fields such as machine learning or big data storage and retrieval, but it also contributes back to them. Recent work, for instance, has shown that spatially-explicit machine learning methods substantially outperform more general data when applied to spatial data even though this spatial component may seem of secondary importance at first glance.

[Source: Spatial@UCSB](http://sdss2019.spatial-data-science.net/)

*   How is it relevant to planning?
*   What makes this course unique?

### Groups
*   Next week we will create our groups! If you must drop the course, please do so before the next class... There is also a long wait list!

## Hands on
*   Introducing GitHub
*   Introducing JupyterHub
    * [Getting started](https://github.com/yohman/up206a/blob/master/Git%20related/01%20-%20Getting%20started%20every%20week.md)
    
*   Intro to Python

## Individual Assignments

There are three deliverables this week. Each are due on Sunday (October 11) by midnight.

### #1. Create a GitHub account, and start a new repo

*   Create a GitHub account, and create a project repo named “up206a-yourfirstname” - [Instructions](https://github.com/yohman/up206a/blob/master/Git%20related/02%20-%20Create%20your%20class%20repo.md)
*   Create a Readme.md file in your GitHub class repo, and introduce your Data Science project space (hint: use this [markdown guide](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/))

### #2. Submit two or more datasets
Search for two or more potential data sources that you may use for your research. Make sure that they are "downloadable." Submit your dataset using the following google form:

*  https://forms.gle/ikT1YDa5gQrV2ntb6


### #3. Reading assignment
This week's reading assignment is for you to find an article, blog, journal, chapter, or book that talks about data/information/knowledge/coding that includes some spatial component. Make sure it is something that you would like to share with the class. Then, write a paragraph (yes, a paragraph, not two) that summarizes the article. Write a second paragraph where you reflect critically and creatively about the material in your own words. Why did this article speak to you in regards to your approach to data and research? 

The instructors will select a few of the readings for discussion in week 2.

You have two options on how to submit your reading assignment. 

1. Option A: Upload your assignment as a pdf to your github repo.
1. Option B (preferred): Create a markdown file in your repo titled `Week1_reading_assignment.md` and submit your assignment using markdown code.


